[develop] Option to use GNU Singularity container with Rocky9 OS and spack-stack-1.9.2 libraries (#1347)
ufs-community/ufs-srweather-app: doc/UsersGuide/BuildingRunningTesting/ContainerQuickstart.rst

Container-Based Quick Start Guide
====================================

This chapter provides a unified Quick Start Guide for building and running the
“out-of-the-box” community test case for the Unified Forecast System (:term:`UFS`)
Short-Range Weather (SRW) Application using container technology. Containers
provide a reproducible, portable, and uniform environment that includes a
pre-built software stack for the SRW App. This eliminates the need to compile
large dependency software stacks on every machine, reduces setup time, and supports
consistent workflows across different systems and cloud platforms.

Two container options are provided:

* **Intel-based container:** uses Intel compilers and Intel MPI.
* **GNU-based container:** uses fully open-source GNU compilers and OpenMPI.

Additional differences between the containers are that the Intel-based image includes pre-built SRW App binaries. 

> When using GNU-based container, users download UFS SRW App (develop branch) from GitHub and build it interatively by 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When using the GNU-based container, users download UFS SRW App (develop branch) from GitHub and build it interatively by 
```

> When using the GNU-based container, users download UFS SRW App (develop branch) from GitHub and build it interatively by 

Reviewer 2: Should "interatively" be "interactively"?

Author: updated in the recent commit

> shelling into the cotainer.

Reviewer: Should be container.

```suggestion
shelling into the container.
```

* The **Intel-based container** requires Intel compilers and Intel MPI (or the
  Intel oneAPI toolkit).
* The **GNU-based container** requires GNU compilers (GCC 12+ recommended) and an
  MPI library compatible with OpenMPI (e.g., system OpenMPI or Cray-MPICH).

Users must choose a container consistent with the host environment's compiler and
MPI availability.

.. note::

   Building a singularity container image/sandbox relies on user's temporary space (TMP); these requirements are much higher for 
   Intel-based container. The example is given in :ref:`Appendix` on seting up TMP spaces for singularity to avoid exceeding default TMP space quotas.

----------------------------------------
Download and Stage Input Data
----------------------------------------

Both Intel and GNU container workflows require the same SRW App input datasets.
These include:

* static files
* fixed fields
* grid and orography
* initial conditions (ICs)
* lateral boundary conditions (LBCs)
* configuration files

On **Level 1 Systems** (see :srw-wiki:`Supported Platforms and Compilers <Supported-Platforms-and-Compilers>`), these datasets are pre-staged. They become available

> inside the container as long as the top-level directory containing the data is bound via ``-B`` option and argument with the singularity .

Reviewer: ```suggestion
inside the container as long as the top-level directory containing the data is bound via the ``-B`` option.
```

.. note::
   * The NOAA Cloud containers are accessible only to those with EPIC resources. 

It is practical to set an environment variable to point to the container: 

.. code-block:: console

   export img=/path/to/ubuntu22.04-intel-ue-1.6.0-srw-dev.img

> Convert the read-only image in a shared location to a writable sandbox in a user's space:

Reviewer 2: This is an optional step and the conditional "may" should still be kept.

Author: noted! changing it to the following:

`Users may convert the read-only image in a shared location to a writable sandbox in user's space:`

Author: Updated in the recent commit.

----------------------------------------
GNU-Based Container Workflow
----------------------------------------

The GNU-based workflow uses a fully open-source toolchain (GCC + OpenMPI). This
workflow is recommended for environments where open-source compilers are
preferred or where Intel toolchains are not available.

Build the GNU Container from Docker Hub
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Load Singularity or Apptainer module if needed:

.. code-block:: console

   module load singularity

Build a Singularity/Apptainer container image from the DockerHub image:

.. code-block:: console

   singularity build rocky9-ss192-gcc13.sif \
        docker://noaaepic/rocky9-gcc13.3.1-wm:v1.9.2-srw

Set the environment variable for convenience and later use:

.. code-block:: console

   export IMG=${PWD}/rocky9-ss192-gcc13.sif

Download the UFS SRW App and Submodules
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Clone the UFS SRW App develop branch from the GitHub repository as is done when  :ref:`Building the SRW App <BuildSRW>`.

.. code-block:: console

>    git clone -b feature/gnu-container \

Reviewer: develop rather than feature/gnu-container:

```suggestion
   git clone -b develop \
```

>        https://github.com/natalie-perlin/ufs-srweather-app.git ufs-srweather-app

Reviewer: While true currently, should this point to the authoritative branch?

```suggestion
       https://github.com/ufs-community/ufs-srweather-app.git ufs-srweather-app
```

   cd ufs-srweather-app
   ./manage_externals/checkout_externals

Save the environoment variable SRW for later use:

.. code-block:: console

   export SRW=${PWD}

Enter the GNU Container with Platform-Specific Bindings 
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Shell into the existing Singularity container image in order to build the SRW App interactively. 
Python/conda environment and UFS SRW App binaries will be built inside the container. Some platforms
may require additional user host system directories to be specified with ``-B`` option (bind) 
to make them available inside the container. This could be required, for example, 
for **conda**-related configurations to be stored in a user home directory that resides on a different 

> file system from the current directory. Below are given examples to shell int the container on some Level 1 Platforms/

Reviewer: ```suggestion
file system from the current directory. Below are examples on how to shell into the container on some Level 1 Platforms/
```

NOAA RDHPCs:

* NOAA AWS/Azure:

  .. code-block:: console

     singularity shell -B /contrib -e $IMG

* Hercules / Orion:

  .. code-block:: console

     singularity shell -B /work -B /local -e $IMG

* Ursa:

  .. code-block:: console

     singularity shell -B /scratch3 -e $IMG

* Gaea:

  .. code-block:: console

     singularity shell -B /gpfs -B /ncrc/home2 -e $IMG

Build SRW Executables and Conda Environments
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Inside the container, set environmental variables that help to generate consistent build and 
run-time environment:

Specify location of the Singularity image:

.. code-block:: console

   export IMG=/full/path/to/rocky9-ss192-gcc13.sif

Optional platform-specific paths that require to be accessible by the container at runtime:

.. code-block:: console

   export BIND_ADD=/local   # Orion/Hercules, needed during run-time for interaction with Slurm job scheduler
   export BIND_ADD=/var     # Gaea-c6

Build executables using devbuild.sh script, in a similar way as described in  :ref:`Building Executables <BuildExecutables>`, 

> except placing binaries into the ``./bin`` directory. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
except placing binaries into the ``bin`` directory. 
```

> This is the essential difference, as the default ./exec/ directory where the SRW App expects to find binaries 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is the essential difference, as the default ``exec`` directory where the SRW App expects to find binaries 
```

will be set up to contain wrappers for the actual binaries.

.. code-block:: console

   ./devbuild.sh --bin-dir=bin --platform=singularity --compiler=gnu \
        | tee log.devbuild.sh_001

When all the conda environments and binaries are successfully built, exit from the container:

.. code-block:: console

   exit

Use Wrapper Scripts and Runtime Environment Files
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

In addition to binaries and conda installs, successful build produces:

* ``srw.sh`` — wrapper to launch tasks within the container
* ``ufs-srw.env`` — runtime environment settings and environment variables

Verify the following configuration in the ``srw.sh``:

* ``img`` variable points to the correct ``.sif`` GNU container image file, absolute path
* ``-B`` binds all host directories, required for access inside the container at runtime, including staged data locations

Link Executables to Wrapper Scripts
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> The following code below is run interactively to create links to executables in ./exec directory to a wrapper script. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following code below is run interactively to create links to executables in ``exec`` directory to a wrapper script. 
```

Make sure the $SRW variable is properly set, as done after downloading the UFS SRW App repository and dependencies. 

.. code-block:: console

   cd $SRW
   export wrapper_script=${SRW}/srw.sh

   mkdir -p exec
   cd bin

   for file in *; do
       echo $file
       if [[ "$file" != "build_settings.yaml" ]]; then
           ln -s $wrapper_script ../exec/$file
       else
           cp -pv $file ../exec/.
       fi
   done

Prepare configuration files 
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A machine file ``singularity.yaml`` needs to be configured in ``$SRW/ush/machines`` directory 
for running the UFS SRW App test case. Two available templates provided, 
``singularity_gnu.srun.yaml`` and ``singularity_gnu.mpirun.yaml``. The first template is for launching
the binaries on a host system with the ``srun`` command when Slurm job scheduler is available with PMI2 plugin, 
the latter case is for launching the binarieson the host system using ``mpirun`` (some HPC systems may prohibit 
use of mpirun). Use the template that fits your system, e.g.:

.. code-block:: console

>    cp -v singularity_gnu.srun.yaml singularity.yaml

Reviewer: There is no precedent to have additional examples of machine files within the `ush/machine` directory.  Users are expected to update the machine file with information pertinent to the machine that they are running on.

Rather than having additional singularity machine files, it would be better to let users know that they should set:
```
RUN_CMD_FCST: mpirun -n $nprocs
RUN_CMD_POST: mpirun -n $nprocs
RUN_CMD_PRDGEN: mpirun -n $nprocs
RUN_CMD_UTILS: mpirun -n $nprocs
```
for mpirun, and:
```
RUN_CMD_FCST: srun --mpi=pmi2 -n $nprocs
RUN_CMD_POST: srun --mpi=pmi2 -n $nprocs
RUN_CMD_PRDGEN: srun --mpi=pmi2 -n $nprocs
RUN_CMD_UTILS: srun --mpi=pmi2 -n $nprocs
```
for srun.

This will remove the need for multiple examples for singularity.

Author: Thank you for the comment! 
In a revised version, only single singularity.yaml file is retained. The documentation is changed to add information on how the MPI launch command is to be configured. 

It also require a slight change of order of the subchapters:
preparing a wflow_singularity modulefile is discussed first, in which GNU- and MPI host-based modules are added to be loaded. Then, depending on these modules, next subchapter mentions configuration of "singularity.yaml" file where either mpirun or srun are to be specified.

Further edit the ``singularity.yaml`` to configure for your system:

* ``WORKFLOW_MANAGER`` - workflow manager; rocoto (default)
* ``NCORES_PER_NODE``
* ``SCHED`` - job scheduler; slurm (default)
* paths to staged datasets, in particular, in ``data:`` section
* ``RUN_CMD_*`` variables, including MPI launch commands
* scheduler settings

Another configuration file for the community test case, ``config.yaml`` is expected to be located in 

> ``./ush`` directory. Use a singularity GNU template for the community test case:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``ush`` directory. Use a singularity GNU template for the community test case:
```

.. code-block:: console

   cp ${SRW}/ush/config.singularity.yaml ${SRW}/ush/config.yaml

Edit the ``config.yaml`` to configure following:

* ``ACCOUNT`` - account for running jobs on your compute platform (if required)
* ``EXPT_SUBDIR`` - experiment directory; a default is ``test_community``
* ``USE_CRON_TO_RELAUNCH`` - set to **false** (default); may set to **true** if system allow use of cron/crontab

Load Host Modules and Generate Workflow
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> To generate and run the workflow, host-system GNU module and corresponding MPI module need to be used and 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To generate and run the workflow, the host-system GNU module and corresponding MPI module need to be
```

> loaded to interact with GNU-built libraries and SRW App binaries. Users would neeed to determine 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
loaded to interact with GNU-built libraries and SRW App binaries. Users need to determine 
```

> their availability on a host system, and add these modules to ``./modulefiles/wflow_singularity.yaml``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
their availability on a host system, and add these modules to the ``modulefiles/wflow_singularity.yaml``
```

modulefile. If Singularity/Apptainer software requires a module to be loaded, it needs to be added as well.
Loading the rocoto module could be added, if crontab option to relaunch job tasks is enabled.
The examples below show added modules for running the test on selected Tier 1 platforms.

> For Orion and Hercules the loaded modules is as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For Orion and Hercules:
```

.. code-block:: console

   load("gcc/12.2.0")
   load("openmpi/4.1.4")
   load("singularity")
   load("contrib")
   load("rocoto/1.3.7")

For AWS, Azure:

.. code-block:: console

   load("gnu/13.2.0")
   load("openmpi/4.1.6")
   load("rocoto/1.3.7")

For Ursa:

.. code-block:: console

   load("gcc/12.4.0")
   load("openmpi/4.1.6")
   load("rocoto")

For Gaea:

.. code-block:: console
   
   load("gcc-native/13.2")
   prepend_path("MODULEPATH","/ncrc/proj/epic/rocoto/modulefiles")
   load("rocoto")

After the modulefile is prepared, load it and generate the workflow:

.. code-block:: console

   module use $SRW/modulefiles
   module load wflow_singularity

   cd $SRW/ush
   ./generate_FV3LAM_wflow.py

When generated successully, the ``EXPTDIR`` path for the experiment will be displayed. 

> Record it into the correspongin environmental variable, e.g.:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Record it into the corresponding environmental variable, e.g.:
```

.. code-block:: console
   
   export EXPTDIR='/full/path/to/your/expt_dirs/test_community'

----------------------------------------
Run the SRW Test Case
----------------------------------------

When rocoto workflow manager is available, cd to the experiment directory, and issue the ``rocotorun`` command to advance the workflow.

.. code-block:: console

   cd $EXPTDIR
   rocotorun -w FV3LAM_wflow.xml -d FV3LAM_wflow.db -v 10

Users must reissue ``rocotorun`` periodically unless workflow automation is configured.
Monitor the progress:

.. code-block:: console

   rocotostat -w FV3LAM_wflow.xml -d FV3LAM_wflow.db -v 10

When all tasks show STATUS as ``SUCCEEDED``, the experiment has completed successfully. 

.. note::

   Rocoto workflow manager interacts with a job scheduler, e.g., Slurm, and relies on the recent information 
   about the job provided by the job scheduler. To get the updated information of the job status it is always 
   required to run the ``rocotorun ...`` command before issuing the ``rocotostat ...``.

For users who do not have Rocoto installed, see :numref:`Section %s <RunUsingStandaloneScripts>` for guidance on how to run the workflow without Rocoto. 

> rocotorun -w FV3LAM_wflow.xml -d FV3LAM_wflow.db -v 10

Reviewer: Looks like an extra line that can be removed.

```suggestion

```

for **conda**-related configurations to be stored in a user home directory that resides on a different 
file system from the current directory. Below are given examples on how to shell into the 
container on some Level 1 Platforms.
NOAA RDHPCs:

* NOAA AWS/Azure:

  .. code-block:: console

     singularity shell -B /contrib -e $IMG

* Hercules / Orion:

  .. code-block:: console

     singularity shell -B /work -B /local -e $IMG

* Ursa:

  .. code-block:: console

     singularity shell -B /scratch3 -e $IMG

* Gaea:

  .. code-block:: console

     singularity shell -B /gpfs -B /ncrc/home2 -e $IMG

Build SRW Executables and Conda Environments
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Inside the container, set environmental variables that help to generate consistent build and 
run-time environment:

Specify location of the Singularity image:

.. code-block:: console

   export IMG=/full/path/to/rocky9-ss192-gcc13.sif

Optional platform-specific paths that require to be accessible by the container at runtime:

.. code-block:: console

   export BIND_ADD=/local   # Orion/Hercules, needed during run-time for interaction with Slurm job scheduler

>    export BIND_ADD=/var     # Gaea-c6

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   export BIND_ADD=/var     # Gaea-C6
```

Host-system GNU module and corresponding MPI module need to be used and 
loaded to interact with GNU-built libraries and SRW App binaries. Users neeed to determine 
their availability on a host system, and add these modules to ``modulefiles/wflow_singularity.yaml``
modulefile. If Singularity/Apptainer software requires a module to be loaded, it needs to be added as well.
Loading the rocoto module could be added, if crontab option to launch job tasks is enabled.
The examples below show added modules for running the test on selected Tier 1 platforms.

For Orion and Hercules the loaded modules is as follows:

.. code-block:: console

   load("gcc/12.2.0")
   load("openmpi/4.1.4")
   load("singularity")
   load("contrib")
   load("rocoto/1.3.7")

For AWS, Azure:

.. code-block:: console

   load("gnu/13.2.0")
   load("openmpi/4.1.6")
   load("rocoto/1.3.7")

For Ursa:

.. code-block:: console

   load("gcc/12.4.0")
   load("openmpi/4.1.6")
   load("rocoto")

For Gaea:

.. code-block:: console
   
   load("gcc-native/13.2")
   prepend_path("MODULEPATH","/ncrc/proj/epic/rocoto/modulefiles")
   load("rocoto")

Prepare Configuration Files 
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> 1. A machine configuration file ``singularity.yaml`` needs to be configured in ``$SRW/ush/machines`` directory. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. A machine configuration file ``singularity.yaml`` needs to be configured in ``$SRW/ush/machine`` directory. 
```

It contains variables to set the system job sheduler, node count information, queue and patition names for use
with batch job scheduler, locations of fix climatology files and model data input files, as well
as workflow manager configuration.

> Depending on host system job scheduler and GNU and MPI modules that added to ``wflow_singularity.yaml``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Depending on host system job scheduler and GNU and MPI modules that were added to ``wflow_singularity.yaml``
```

> in the previous step, MPI job on user system are expected to be lauched with either **mpirun** or **srun**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in the previous step, MPI jobs on user system are expected to be launched with either **mpirun** or **srun**.
```

Edit the following variables to specify the MPI jobs launch command that fits your system: 
``RUN_CMD_FCST``, ``RUN_CMD_POST``, ``RUN_CMD_UTILS``, ``RUN_CMD_PRDGEN``.
The default launch command is set to **mpirun**; set it to **srun --mpi=pmi2** when using Slurm to 
interact with container-installed MPI plugins for Slurm (PMI or PMI2). 
For example, if the default variable is set:

.. code-block:: console

 RUN_CMD_FCST: mpirun -n ${nprocs}

> change it to the following to use Slurm-based MPI job lauch:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
change it to the following to use Slurm-based MPI job launch:
```

.. code-block:: console

 RUN_CMD_FCST: srun --mpi=pmi2 -n ${nprocs}

.. note::
   

>    The Tier 1 Platform that were tested and require use of ``srun --mpi=pmi2`` are **Gaea-c6**, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   The Tier 1 Platform that were tested and require use of ``srun --mpi=pmi2`` are **Gaea-C6**, 
```

   **Hercules**, **Orion**. The Tier 1 systems **Ursa**, **NOAA-AWS** and **NOAA-Azure** allow the 

>    MPI job launch both ways including  ``mpurun``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   MPI job launch using both ``srun`` and  ``mpirun``.
```

Additional edits the ``singularity.yaml`` to configure for your system include:

* ``WORKFLOW_MANAGER`` - workflow manager; rocoto (default), ``rocoto:`` section for job tasks

> * ``NCORES_PER_NODE`` - 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* ``NCORES_PER_NODE`` - number of cores available per node on the platform
```

* ``SCHED`` - job scheduler; slurm (default)
* ``FIX*`` - paths to staged fix climatogy datasets
* ``data:`` section: staged external model input files
* ``RUN_CMD_*`` variables, including MPI launch commands

2. Configuration file for the community test case, ``config.yaml`` is expected to be located in 
``ush`` directory. Use a singularity GNU template for the community test case:

.. code-block:: console

   cp ${SRW}/ush/config.singularity.yaml ${SRW}/ush/config.yaml

Edit the ``config.yaml`` to configure following:

* ``ACCOUNT`` - account for running jobs on your compute platform (if required)
* ``EXPT_SUBDIR`` - experiment directory; a default is ``test_community``
* ``USE_CRON_TO_RELAUNCH`` - set to **false** (default); may set to **true** if system allow use of cron/crontab to launch job tasks

 
Generate Workflow
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Load the modulefile **wflow_singularity** containing host system compiler and MPI modules, which starts
the conda environment (srw_app) for running the workflow:

.. code-block:: console

   module use $SRW/modulefiles
   module load wflow_singularity

> Ggenerate the workflow:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Generate the workflow:
```

.. code-block:: console

   cd $SRW/ush
   ./generate_FV3LAM_wflow.py

When generated successully, the ``EXPTDIR`` path for the experiment will be displayed. 
Record it into the corresponding environmental variable, e.g.:

.. code-block:: console
   
   export EXPTDIR='/full/path/to/your/expt_dirs/test_community'

----------------------------------------
Run the SRW Test Case
----------------------------------------

When rocoto workflow manager is available, cd to the experiment directory, and issue the ``rocotorun`` command to advance the workflow.

.. code-block:: console

   cd $EXPTDIR
   rocotorun -w FV3LAM_wflow.xml -d FV3LAM_wflow.db -v 10

Users must reissue ``rocotorun`` periodically unless workflow automation is configured.
Monitor the progress:

.. code-block:: console

   rocotostat -w FV3LAM_wflow.xml -d FV3LAM_wflow.db -v 10

When all tasks show STATUS as ``SUCCEEDED``, the experiment has completed successfully. 

.. note::

   Rocoto workflow manager interacts with a job scheduler, e.g., Slurm, and relies on the recent information 

>    about the job provided by the job scheduler. To get the updated information of the job status it is always 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   about the job provided by the job scheduler. To get the updated information of the job status, it is always 
```
